the human and the planet Earth get 90 of
its calories from 10 of the 20 000
edible plants well that's as it should
be or that's a problem that's a problem
Dr Jeffrey Bland welcome to the show wow
Tom I can't tell you how much I
appreciate being part of this
opportunity together as the father of
functional medicine I cannot be more
excited to have you here or to ask the
following question what are the three
superfoods that people should eat
regularly if they want to have Peak
weight loss and avoid disease
yeah so I I think that that list
obviously depending on the day of the
week or the time of the year might
change but for me right now why would it
change so frequently well because for
you from an education perspective or for
the person from a seasonal perspective
yeah so I believe in fresh
and uh you know if we're eating
strawberries in the winter
they're they're not fresh unless we are
living in a Southern Climate so if you
ask where do you where are you going to
get the most nutrient dense products
there's some seasonality just like there
is in frequency of eating time
restricted feeding gives maybe a better
outcome of eating than eating seven
times a day you know so there are
certain things about timing circadian
rhythms that I think are important so
when you ask me what foods I it really
in some way depend upon the season of
the year but without a kind of a
consideration of circadian potential
um I would say that the things that
really kind of
match the need of our present situation
and we ask you know what are we
suffering from as a society and then
what foods then match up against those
things so we're having an immune stress
we know that the human population
globally is under immune stress and why
it's under immune stress because of all
the things that have been part of the
21st century living industrialization
time compression uh xenobiotics over
medicated I mean there's so many things
we could do you have to break those down
xenobiotics toxic waste products
pollutants persistent chemicals these
would be foreign molecules okay so um
you know if it's there's an abbreviation
that's used in the literature called
Pops Pops pop stand for persistent
organic pollutants these are xenobotics
so it could be things like
organophosphates or it could be things
like organochlorine compounds or
polyrominated biphenyls and all these
things that have built up by 50 000 new
chemical agents coming into our
environment and being bioconcident
traded through the food chain over the
last 70 years since industrialization so
we know that we have that burden that
previous organisms living in the planet
didn't have so then how do we get rid of
those we do so through unfortunately a
process that was involved in our bodies
called detoxification and it turns out
that this is a super family of genes
that control our detoxification process
both of internal chemicals and external
exposed chemicals there are foods that
contain specific types of ingredients
that actually speak to the genes that
regulate the ability for our bodies to
detoxify that's an aha
I want to talk about this idea of speaks
to our genes so one of the things so one
I want people to understand that you
really are considered the father of
functional medicine what that means this
is like 89.90 if I remember right you're
thinking along these lines you bring a
bunch of people together and you're like
hey I think that the system of dealing
with symptoms is probably not the right
way to approach it you guys come up with
this idea if it's really about the
function what's the function why is it
breaking down and what do we do about it
so putting it in that context now you've
got this idea of immunoregeneration so
and we'll get into the whole personality
of the immune system and all that which
is fascinating and despite being as deep
as I am in this I've never heard anybody
speak to the immune system as having a
personality before which I think is
really powerful
but now we're on this anchoring moment
of phytochemicals so there are things
that we can consume so by the way this
just gave myself the chills here
thinking about this and I always tell
people oh something that I took from
biology which is your phrase that food
is information
we're going to eat things that actually
talk to our immune system is one of the
ways I'm sure it's talking to a whole
lot of things but uh in researching you
this idea of that phytochemicals and if
I misspeak anything which I meant but
phytochemicals are basically the plant's
immune system so they're growing up in a
harsh environment but they can't run
they can't go to the doctor and so they
create these chemicals
talk to me about co-evolution though how
does it become a communication with our
immune system oh my word there is so
much uh to unpack and what you did say
that was that was a brilliant summary by
the way I am literally just stealing all
your words no no no thank you all right
so
I'm gonna I'm gonna answer that if I
could by finishing kind of the thought
around detoxification because it links
back to your question about
phytochemicals and evco evolution so
there are now discovered certain plants
within the family of twenty thousand
edible plants of which we get 90 of our
calories from 10 plants I want to say
that again the human and the planet
Earth get 90 of its calories from 10 of
the 20 000 edible plants well that's it
as it should be or that's a problem
that's a problem that's taking the
complexity of nature that can speak to
our genes in very complex orchestrated
ways and narrowing it down just having
the brass or percussion session playing
the the sweet so it's a whole different
way of thinking about it and we know
we're losing food diversity at a rapid
rate that's another topic let me go back
here so I don't get get off topic and
talk about what happens when you then
select a food for whom the genes of that
plant
are that to produce a defense in their
environment against their offenders and
depending on where they grow where they
have been genetically uh evolving uh the
soil condition the atmospheric
conditions they will have different
personalities because they have
different genes and there are some
plants that will produce very high
levels of these phytochemicals that have
the capability of defending them by
their ability to activate their immune
system against the pests in that region
it could be mold it could be rust it
could be bugs and as a consequence they
are bacteria or fungi they're they're
capable of having that defense and what
we have found now when I say we I really
should talk about phytochemists I guess
I'd consider myself part of that
Community have found that some of these
plant foods are capable when consumed by
humans then of activating the genes in
our body particularly in the liver and
in the intestinal tract that activate
detoxification processes so here is a
cross communication of a plant that is
defending itself against its foreign
Invaders in its environment that then
when consumed now what are those Foods
well they're principally in the
cruciferous vegetable family broccoli
cauliflower brussels sprouts cabbage
these are foods that have these family
of phytochemicals and have the name
glucosinolates leukocinolates then when
they're eaten in our diet are broken
down by our digestive process to release
a whole series of bioactive compounds in
O3 carbinol and other two
hydroxyphenylbutane and all these other
things of phenol
isociocyanate I hope they do something
that's simpler to explain than the names
yes so these substances then activate
the genes in our liver our liver the
human liver to promote the ability to
detoxify foreign endogenous and
exogenous toxins so out of the blood or
out of the uh out of the tissue system
so what happens when we eat obviously or
breathe ultimately those substances get
absorbed into our blood the blood then
gets purified by going through the liver
the liveries are one of our detoxifying
principle detoxifying organisms and in
those liver cells called the hepatocytes
reside high levels of these specific
enzymes that will detoxify and make uh
safe those chemicals that get released
into our urine feces okay so the food
that we eat if we're eating the right
foods have this chemical messenger that
tells our liver to upregulate these
enzymes that are able to detoxify
otherwise our liver wouldn't be able to
keep up with the toxins the toxins end
up in our tissues that's exactly right
wow okay so the idea of rejuvenating
your immune system I think is pretty
important so I want to go back to the
very first thing that you said uh to
Anchor everybody and we said is we're in
this stressed environment our immune
systems are stressed tell us how often
our immune system cells are being
created because I this was shocking to
me I didn't realize it was yeah I think
it's very interesting you know I do a
lot of Education with Healthcare
Providers uh different
different genres and I'm always amazed
that these individuals who have skilled
in the art have studied anatomy and
physiology extensively to pass their
board exams when you get down to some
basic questions about the immune system
they don't seem to really have had the
exposure to things like the immune
system is producing every second about
80 000 new immune cells that's so crazy
and and so our body is constantly
recycling our immune system about every
two to three months our whole body's
immune cell system turns over to be
replaced by new cells and then the
question is well they are are they good
as good worse or better than the cells
they're replacing and that to me is
where the the tip of the spear resides
for some of our problems and I can look
at covid-19 as an example why did some
people get more problems with regardless
sorry it's going to virus and others why
did when they got into why you answer
that tell me what it means to be good
bad better worse like what what is it
yeah so our immune system is very
complex if we did still it down in to a
kind of sound bite there are three arms
in the immune system there is this
ancient part of it which we call the
innate immune system it's our first line
of defense it's principally found in the
mucosal tissues of our body the the
barriers that defend us from the outside
world so that would be the in the guts
there always on guard ready that's right
the lungs the skin you have a lot of
these innate immune cells uh the second
is the second line of defense which is
called the Adaptive immune system that's
the one that most people are familiar
with when you get immunized that it
builds antibodies that remember that
exposure to be able to do battle the
second time around and then the third
arm is the kind of crosstalk
Communicator between those two systems
which we call the the lymphocyte system
T helper cells deregulatory cells
natural killer cells these are all
interwoven in this Orchestra called our
immune system now it turns out that the
person that killer so I get the innate
immune system there on guard they're the
centuries at the door yes just in case
then you've got the people that go okay
cool that's a bad guy I'm gonna run
around tell everybody we trained to beat
that bad guy we now we come into this
system but I don't know what the natural
killer cells the T cells what do they do
yeah so these are cells that have
specific personalities to take a
direction from what they're learning
from the interrogation from the innate
cells and the particular family of white
blood cells that produce antibodies the
so-called B cells and so they are the
kind of crosstalk communicators and so
if they get the message that we're under
alarm we're under hostility we're under
siege
that Under Siege could either come from
the outside world like a virus or a
bacteria or a toxin or it could come
from the inside world that we actually
have built the buildup of toxins in our
body that are activating the immune
system that gets into the whole
definition of autoimmunity are we really
allergic to ourselves I don't believe so
I think the term is wrong I don't think
we have autoimmunity what we have is an
immune reaction to our self being
converted into non-self whoa and then we
ask how do we have that happen uh-huh
that was going to be my next question so
okay so I know one way that we trigger
autoimmunity and tell me if this is what
you mean by self and the non-self so I'm
eating something let's say gluten and it
breaks down the epithelial lining of my
gut which for those that haven't heard
of that it's a single cell barrier
basically and the Junctions break in
some people quite rapidly if you're
eating the type of gluten found in the
U.S we can talk about Italy and stuff
later which maybe have better ways of
handling it but here in the U.S you get
that Junction broken a lot
that then allows partially digested or I
suppose even not really digested uh
proteins to cross that lining and they
actually get into the bloodstream so now
you have true non-self whereas like yo
there's a protein that's not supposed to
be here
now the bad news becomes when you have
something in the body that through
biomimicry looks exactly the same so you
have gluten that comes in that looks
like the hippocampus if I remember right
and so it comes in it's like oh word
we're going to build uh our not the
Adaptive the reactive immune system that
was called cool it identifies that
protein it's just we've got it we know
how to deal with that it then finds it
in the hippocampus or whatever in the
brain goes this is the same even though
it's actually technically not and now it
goes on attack because those proteins
look identical and now you seem to have
become allergic to yourself
beautifully stated wow that's a medical
school lecture that should be published
to all the aspiring Physicians a lot of
episodes of Health Theory that's really
good there's another part of the story
however I want to add on to bolt on to
that and that is what happens if you
have continually high blood sugar so
you're eating a diet that has high
glycemic response a hypoxemic load diet
you talk a lot about that in your in
your work over the years and the people
you've interviewed
um so you have then we know a case of
building up what's called hemoglobin A1c
and people that wear continuous glucose
monitoring devices now are trying to
keep their A1C low and there's all sorts
of ads on TV for the new drugs it will
lower A1C well what is A1C it is a
natural molecule in the body native to
us called hemoglobin you find it in your
red blood cells and it's at it's that
molecule that holds onto iron and makes
your blood red so that hemoglobin if it
is exposed to a lot of sugar then
becomes chemically down to the sugar so
that's glycosylated hemoglobin because
sugar is sticky that's right when the
glucose bumps into a protein when your
sugar and your blood is high it doesn't
just bump in and bounce off it actually
chemically reacts with your protein to
make it a different protein now we think
of that as being only with A1C but no
it's it's doing that to the major
protein in your blood which is albumin
and so if you look at glycosylated
albumin which we've done now for over 30
years it's a more indicator of your risk
to diabetes to heart disease to dementia
then is A1C because now what does human
do albumin is your major blood protein
and it's part of your immune system the
globular protein to your blood the
albumin in your blood are those
transport proteins that take things like
vitamins fat soluble vitamins they take
nutrients they take off waste products
it becomes a transport system for your
body and if you were to glycosylate your
albumin because you have blood sugar
it's no longer the native albumin that
your your genes would want to make it's
a new Foreigner now you've just
converted self to non-self
yeah
you're going to ask me a question let me
let me make sure I can follow up on this
the question is okay if it becomes a
non-self molecule then what's an Adept
immune system going to do an Adept
immune system is going to say there's a
foreigner I need to go out and form a
reaction to it using my uh adaptive
immune system now you're going to ask me
does that mean that people have blood
sugar problems and diabetes often have
autoimmune disease yes they're
comorbidities because they share common
mechanisms related to you becoming non-u
this is a huge different oppression
because a lot of people they feel they
get autoimmune disease because it's in
their genes there is no strong evidence
that any autoimmune disease is linked
with a specific Gene they're linked with
experiences that our genes are exposed
to over the course of living so okay
we've got sugar is bumping into things
it's chemically altering those things
our immune system goes this is no longer
self it mounts a defense now going back
to this idea of your immune system has a
personality but that personality is
temporary if you change the environment
into which it is created it will be
different than it would otherwise be and
so when I was researching you the thing
that came to mind was okay my immune
system cells are coming off at whatever
8 000 per second eighty thousand
eighties my brain's like it can't be
happening uh 80 000 per second if
they're born into trauma then just like
a kid born into trauma they're going to
grow up with some dysfunction
and we'll call that dysfunction
overreactive they're just like they're
going after everything because they have
reason to because of what you just
described
if they are born into an environment
where it's there's no high alert
everything's good blood's clear there's
not sugar globbing onto everything and
changing these things in a foreign I
don't have a broken epithelial lining in
my gut so there aren't foreign proteins
coming into my bloodstream everybody's
chill there a kid that grew up in a nice
happy healthy family and I think we all
know people that have been in both and
we understand the emotional reactivity
of somebody who grew up in trauma versus
somebody who has that emotional
resilience when they grew up in a more
stable household and so the emotional
reaction is somebody that grew up with
stability love all that it's in
proportion they can encounter something
hard difficult and they're able to stay
pretty even Keel in fact I will just
tell everybody right now if you want to
be a successful entrepreneur you have to
be good at self-soothing so you need
that emotional resilience
over here you get somebody who's
emotionally reactive that analogy works
so well for me in terms of understanding
certainly covid which is where you were
going so
talk to us then about a cytokine storm
is that an immune system that came into
the world in trauma and now you
introduce another trauma and the
reaction is just so big so are you
familiar with moisture sev's work on the
ice babies in uh not by name so moisture
Sev um and Mark meeting his colleague at
uh the what was really the Han selling a
laboratory at McGill University which
was the father of stress was hanselier
and so their their stress researchers
but from a whole different way than we
often think about stress researches
they've been looking at these uh effects
that we go through with our life
experiences post-traumatic stress
syndrome the unexpected things that
happen in our life that can be very
traumatic and does that produce a mark
on our cells and at the genetic Mark not
changing our genes but changing the way
that genes are expressing their function
into our body and this concept of
epigenetic modulation is the currency of
the 21st century because it is this
science of Hope the science of Hope
why is it the science of Hope because
there are many people who feel when
they're chronically ill they've had bad
experiences they may have been subjected
to horrible traumatic experiences that
it's a one-way Street once it's been
occurred you can't erase it it's real it
happened and we're just going to live
with it and a lot of that has to do even
with chronic illness if people are told
they go Doctor shopping and eventually
they said well you know it's just how
it's going to be you have to learn a
living it will give you some symptom
managing drugs and hope for the best but
now we recognize actually that our genes
that are regulating all the stuff that
we call our phenotype how we look at can
feel our modifiable based upon how our
genes are getting the signals as to how
they're going to express themselves and
that is controlled by epigenetic above
the gene events that put marks on our
genes some are read here marks others
are don't read here this section of the
book is not to be read and by the way if
we didn't have that in our genes
remember we all came from a single
fertilized egg every of the 100
different cell types we have came from a
single fertilized how did that happen it
happened by this process of evolutionary
embryology differentiation that occurred
with putting these groups on the genes
so one cell becomes a nerve cell another
becomes a cardiac cell and they start to
differentiate so you don't want the
nerve cell reading the cardiac message
but the message is for every cell is in
every cell of our bottom body so it has
to be very differentiated what we have
learned and this is the AHA of the 21st
century is that yes most of this this
bookkeeping occurs in in fetal
development obviously before you're born
and you don't want a lot of stuff
happening after you're born that your
liver cell could become your heart cell
but we have now learned that there are a
small collection of genes
after you are even into your adulthood
that are still modifiable through
epigenetic marking and it turns out that
these uh these what are called
metastable Epi alleles these parts of
your genes that are still capable of
getting messages from your life to make
changes in the editing of how your genes
are expressed those are in regions of
the genome that regulate Downstream
effects like inflammation or cell
replication or cell repair or energy
those principal fundamental processes
that regulate how you are going to
function as individual are still
modifiable based on these epigenetic
marks now let's go to the ice storms
this discussion of moisture cell so
in Canada a number of years ago about 10
years ago now there was a horrible
horrible cold snap in Northern Canada
that uh was so bad of a freeze that
power was out and and of course women
were getting pregnant during this period
of time and it was extraordinarily
stressful uh the temperature is
plummeted you know sub Centigrade
degrees and and they lived in the dark
and it was it was pretty bad so they got
the the question I wonder during that
period was there any alteration the in
the imprinting of the genes as a
consequence of that of that trauma what
is up my friend Tom bilyu here and I
have a big question to ask you how would
you rate your level of personal
discipline on a scale of one to ten if
your answer is anything less than a 10.
I've got something cool for you and let
me tell you right now discipline by its
very nature means compelling yourself to
do difficult things that are stressful
boring which is what kills most people
or possibly scary or even painful now
here is the thing achieving huge goals
and stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring building your levels of personal
discipline is not easy but let me tell
you it pays off in fact I will tell you
you're never going to achieve anything
meaningful unless you develop discipline
all right I've just released a class
from Impact Theory university called how
to build Ironclad discipline that
teaches you the process of building
yourself up in this area so that you can
push yourself to do the hard things that
greatness is going to require of you
right click the link on the screen
register for this class right now and
let's get to work I will see you inside
this Workshop from Impact Theory
University until then my friends be
legendary peace out
and lo and behold they found out that
that was true then they talked to a
investigator a psychiatrist actually at
uh Masonic School of Medicine who had
been studying second generation
Holocaust victim descendants and finding
lo and behold that the methylation
epigenetic marks in the in their genes
one generation removed this is so freaky
yes this is really freaking out remember
I said this is the science of hope this
doesn't sound hopeful the way well now
I'm going to close the loop here the the
hopeful part is that what you can put on
you can take off that's what we're
learning there are these processes that
Mark your genes with these events
but there are also processes that will
take them off and now we're going to go
full circle where you and I started one
of the ways that that has been
discovered and I'm talking about just
within the last few years is through
certain phytochemicals in your diet that
modulate the ability to replace these
marks on the genes in such a way as you
get off the bad parts of your book of
life the alarm Parts the inflammatory
parts and re
um
give the ability to really Express the
good parts of your book of life hope you
know Joy uh love the goodness that's in
your genes so we have that ability this
is the currency of 21st century that's
why it's a science of hope this is a
major transition in school I can tell
you through my medical school training
through my PhD training which was now a
number of decades ago this was thought
not to happen at all in fact if you
would have brought this up as a student
in my era you would have been exturgated
from school because at no no the genes
don't change their expression once
you've got them that's all there it's a
one-way street that is not true when I
was a kid yeah it's not true
okay so we have the ability to take it
off the way the marks on the um our
genes
and you have talked about hey nobody
talks about the people talk about RDA
for like protein fat sugar but they
don't talk about it for the
phytochemicals right so what
phytochemicals should we be eating and
where doth we find them oh yeah and uh
I'll I'll tease a punchline I don't take
supplements almost ever and in
researching you I was like yeah buying a
supplement of that so what what are the
things we should be eating to get our
proper amount of phytochemicals that are
going to positively impact the
epigenetic expression of our genes yeah
wow so
this is such an incredible moment in our
opportunity as a culture to redefine how
we want to see ourselves going forward
how we can become more self-dependent on
achieving our health outcomes of desired
function and uh not depend upon Crisis
Care to be the rescue for our eels and
what has been learned is that certain
foods that are high in flavonoids this
is a family of phytochemicals and this
has drawn me in like full-on because I
you know there are no coincidence that
life I've come to recognize we're drawn
into thinking things or coincidences
because they happen together but we're
probably likely to have had them because
of the things that we're dealing with
and who we're hanging out with and the
conversations we're having so what we
think is happenstance probably was more
designed to to give that right that
observation because of experiences that
we're having so for me I had three
experiences all happen within a couple
of months of one another one I met this
investigator at vanville University
Medical School who is doing this
extraordinary work on discovering a new
way to manage blood high blood pressure
through the immune system and I had
never thought about that the immune
system had some relationship with uh
blood pressure so I got this discussing
and looking at his papers and and it
turned out that he had found a molecule
uh has the scientific name to hydroxyl
benzylamine called two hoba that was
capable of modulating the relationship
between the immune system and the wall
of our blood vessels to cause it to
relax which lowers blood pressure and so
I thought well that's kind of cool where
does that where does this immune system
is communicating with the walls of our
blood vessels oh absolutely because the
immune system is going in and out of the
vascular epithelium all the time it's
it's prospecting it's it's searching for
that's where Apple sclerosis and
Immunity tie together heart disease and
an inflamed immune system
so let me just close by saying I asked
the question then where is this two Hova
located and as I read the paper
carefully down in the fine print of the
paper he pointed out there's only one
source in natural world of this in foods
and it's in something called Himalayan
tartory buckwheat there it is I knew
this was going to be part of the
punchline I ordered some yeah well I got
some for you and and I and I never heard
of Himalayan Georgia buckwheat you know
like you you know at first I was like
what are you saying you're so used to
saying it you say it so fast
Himalayan tartare yes it comes from the
art whatever yeah it comes from the
Himalaya the targen District of China on
the on the flanks of the Himalayan
Mountains okay it's at 25 and it's not a
wheat we should tell people that it's
not it's my life it's not a green it's a
seed it's a fruit seed it's been
consumed for 2500 years as a central
food in harsh environments in the blue
zones in the himalayans so I got this
this aha then the next part of the
coincidence was I asked my colleague
that's worked with me now she's very
patient she's been with me for over 25
years working and so she kind of knows
where my strange thoughts go I said are
you familiar with uh Himalayan tartery
buckwheat at all she's no I've never
heard it I said is there where is it
grown in the United States she said well
Jeff you're going off to this meeting in
China in Harbin China so why don't you
let me think about this and I'll do some
sleuthing and when you come back we can
talk about it which he did so I went off
to China and was had a a guide host
mdphd Shanghai East gentleman that was
U.S trained and we went to Harbin and I
had a chance to speak to 8 000 Chinese
medical doctors and their annual health
check about uh health check Center
meeting about functional medicine so I
got on the train with him and here we go
you know for a day trip to uh Shanghai
and we get about halfway across China
and we're going through these
extraordinary agricultural areas you
know City would pop out with a million
people out of nowhere so I I said you
know I said just as a kind of a flyer I
wonder if you're familiar with something
called Himalayan tartery buckwheat and
as if time froze like the like the train
stopped his eyes got very big and he
said you got to be kidding me and I said
no he says we have been looking for
someone in the United States for some
years that had an interest in Himalayan
turtle bucket because my group is the
largest research group studying it and
it's it's health benefits and Physiology
in China
so then I got back and was telling my
colleague that I had met this person and
we were going to form a partnership
and she said well you know I found the
only person who grows Himalayan attorney
book in the United States is a former
Cornell University AG research professor
and his wife who's a nurse they have a
hobby Farm he's retired and he's been
growing this now and they they millic
themselves and they have little roadside
uh stands up in Upstate New York in
Angelica New York and so you got to talk
with him Sam beer was his name I called
him we we now formed a Cooperative
Himalayan tartery organic Cooperative
doing regenerative agriculture we have a
number of farmers up there now we are
farming for the first time ever in
America what are the phytochemicals in
it though that make it so because I know
that they have whatever 100 times the
amount of phytochemicals in them that
whatever the next closest thing has but
what exactly is it yeah and what is the
message that it's sending to our immune
system thank you so it's a portfolio of
about 50 different
members of the flavonoid and the
polyphenol family so you have Rootin you
have quercetin you have gluteal and you
have diasmine you have the spirit and
all in one plant all in one plant it's
an orchestra and you know that's one of
the problems we have I think with
nutritional supplementation in this
country and the way we view it is we we
often think about green Pharmacy okay we
have a drug for such and such now what
is the nutrient that we find that mimics
that drug that's actually not the way
nature Works nature works symphonically
it has a whole different mechanism it's
Network biology they work together to
hormetically is the term hormesis to
modulate the functions that then
regulate how our body functions it's a
different than blocking or inhibiting a
specific product like uh does a drug
it's really orchestrating the symphonic
orchestration of how our body works and
so we're looking at how it actually
imprints the human immune system with
epigenetic marks to regulate how the
immune system functions
okay so let me start putting some things
together so
the immune system is communicated to you
by the immune system of plants
the harsher the environment the plant
grows up in the more that the immune
system is
um developed I'm not sure what the right
way to think of that is but they create
more phytochemicals phytonutrients maybe
it's broader than one simple thing it's
the whole Symphony
um
but given that wind the human immune
system grows up in trauma it becomes
overreactive why is it so awesome
because that's part of what makes
Himalayan tartory buckwheats so
effective is it grows something like
this heinous environment and it doesn't
do cross-pollination itself pollinates
which I didn't even know it protects its
genes yeah so it's this sort of really
pure thing that's grown up in this
insanely difficult environment
um why doesn't that become overreactive
and then trigger our immune system
really really important question
so if you think of our experience of
life from really even the moment we're
conceived up through whatever age we are
we're collecting all these experiences
because our immune system is everywhere
in the body and has a really good memory
so it remembers all these events it
remembers the great days it remembers
the not so good days it remembers the
infections and the colds it remembers
the broken arm and the trauma that might
have all these events now some of those
are so
um strong in in the way that they impact
epigenetically our immune system that
they lock the immune system into a state
of feeling it's in under constant siege
that leads to this state of chronic
inflammation because the immune system
constantly feels like it's doing battle
even if it's not
supposed to be doing battle these cells
and they have names like zombie cells
that's a pretty
descriptive term they're cells that
perpetuate the message of alarm and by
the way um you know I I have come from
an athletic background I was involved
with the University sports I played
basketball in University level and so
the the construct of of athletes who are
constantly forcing to the edge and and
Trauma is part of their training and
part of their experience they're
collecting injuries so how do we get
them to rejuvenate their cells it's not
only the the muscle cells and the joint
and cartilage cells it's the immune
cells and so what we often find is is
people that are involved with athlete
competition benefit from this process of
immunorejuvenation because all of us are
collecting marks some people at a more
accelerated level if you've had
sarskova2 infection and you're in post
covid you probably have marks that we
call scars right on your immune system
now how do you get rid of them you do so
through this process because the body
can rejuvenate its immune system by
replacing new cells for the old ones
getting rid of the old ones by a process
that's only recently been discovered in
one of Nobel Prize in medicine in 2014
called autophagy autophagy is a
self-digestion process to get rid of
debris and now give room to replace it
with new cells so the combination of
rejuvenating through autophagy of your
immune system Plus getting rid of
epigenetic marks gives the opportunity
to roll back the age of your immune
system and its function why does that
come from the world's most stressed out
plant like I would have thought it would
come from the world's most chill plant
the one they grew up in like the relaxed
environment no worries
that's the part I don't understand okay
so I I think we all know that
doing nothing is not the way to be fit
um
in fact the way you'd be most fit is you
have a level of challenge that your body
is going to be exposed to it could be
out yes like every year going but
our own immune system is and and maybe
this is what we have to distinguish okay
I don't want my immune system to
encounter nothing because therefore it
will be weak that's right but I
obviously don't want it to encounter too
much or is it just no no you want it to
be assailed by viruses bacteria fungi
all of it you want it to just be
bombarded but you never wanted to get
confused between self and other thank
you I think
bombarded is probably too strong a word
because we know everything can be taken
to an extreme the good stuff can become
bad if Overexposed we want to rewild our
children we don't want them to be in a
completely sterile environment but we
don't want to purposely expose them to
life-threatening organisms either that's
probably good advice so what we want to
do is find the way to and I use the word
hormesis which is a small exposure to
produce a large effect so that's what
these plants Himalayan Target buckwheat
does this hormesis imply a small bad
exposure like a pain an injury that's
how I've always heard it referred to
it's a small bad that creates the big
positive it doesn't have to be bad what
it has to do is it has to uh
put a memory effect on that system that
improves its ability to say I'm
resilient to that I've seen that I have
the capacity I have the headspace if I
see it again I can manage it and a
balanced immune system as we know
provides a capability most of us don't
get sick all the time even though every
day we're probably exposed to infectious
organisms that would make us yeah will
you please tell people hopefully they've
heard me say this before this is the
most shocking thing I've ever heard of
where does the vast majority of your
immune system live
it lives in your gut 60 to 70 percent is
in communication with your gut
microbiome why and well think of what
happens over the course of living over
the course of doing an average person
will lead somewhere between 10 and 20
pounds of foreign molecules called food
unless you're a cannibal you're not
eating
native molecules you're eating food what
your digestive system then has to make a
decision are there friend and Foe and so
it intimately communicating with that
immune system that's clustered around
your gut it's not just cosmetically you
couldn't find a better place to put it
it's there to actually defuse bad
messages before they get into your body
to create injury do we have a similar
amount in our mouth yeah we do it's
gonna say that would make you know a
completely sterile mouth is not a good
thing either right there are friendly
bacteria that live in our in the mouth I
mean oral pathology oral microbiology
the microbiome of the mouth is important
when it's the proper one not the
streptococcus mutans and some of the uh
associated with dirty mouth or plaque or
things that can create inflammation so
yeah all the barrier surfaces their skin
the same thing the the general organs
have their own specific kind of friendly
microbiome that protects against
infection or or injury
man that's so interesting okay so uh we
need our immune system to get
stressed maybe not the perfect word but
we need it to have to develop resilience
it has to have the Hermetic effect uh it
doesn't have to be bad but it needs to
be exercised yeah
but we do not want it to be over taxed
and we don't want it to exist in a
chronically alerted state that there's
always something bad going on and the
way that we give it that there's always
something bad going on Signal is through
basically a modern diet here's another
thing you said that I'd never heard
before because so I will vacillate
between just not eating vegetables and
because ah I feel great if I'm honest I
feel fantastic when I just eat meat and
when I was researching you uh and you
were saying that you have a hypothesis
or maybe now you know it's true but that
some of the long-term problems that
people face heart disease things like
that could be a result of not getting
the phytonutrients or the phytochemicals
that you need I thought oh that makes me
want to not do my vegetable it's just
out of laziness but my non-vegetable
eating uh regimen so
is that how you see that that there are
just there are either our immune system
or our cells or some there's something
going on with the way that we have
evolved that needs the input from the
phytonutrients
you know again I want to be very
cautious not to sound prescriptive that
that I have this Enlightenment that
everybody should be doing something
because we know that we are varied in
the way we respond to the world and we
know that we're very adaptive organism
however if I try to give thoughts to the
general public from that which I've
learned over 40 plus years of working
this field I think it's clearly obvious
that if you ate only animal products
you'd be getting no fiber
and we know that fiber really is now
called prebiotics prebiotics meaning
it's it's food if it's the right kind of
fiber material it's not an adjustable
carbohydrate that's eaten selectively by
bacteria in our gut or microbiome so our
microbiome diversity and and health is
really in part dependent upon certain
types of prebiotics that only come
through the fibers found in vegetable
products you don't find that in animal
products and as a consequence if you
have that healthy microbiome it'll be
producing things that are helpful for
you like butyrate and short chain fatty
acids that then
re-energize your gut immune system the
so-called colonocytes and as a
consequence there is a benefit to you by
having that vegetable-based
non-digestible carbohydrate called
fibers you would not get if you only ate
animal products 100 so that's number one
number two is by definition uh animal
products have some but not a lot of
phytochemicals you know if you eat wild
meat you will will find in the in the
meat you'll find some phytochemicals if
you do the analysis of wild meat well
because they're eating a much more
complex diet by their the way that
they're foraging off nature versus
eating corn which you might get some
phytochemicals coming from corn
zeaxanthin but you're probably not going
to get a variety of phytochemicals in
your meat I think it's worth a slight
detour here for a second it's one of
those things that I should have put
together maybe subconsciously did put
together from all the random factoids
that I know about food and all that but
when I heard you say that industrial
farming becomes a problem because
nutrients are stored in the fat and what
you eat ends up in the fat and so if
you're eating a cow that's only ever
eaten corn that's very different than a
cow that's out there grazing on a whole
bunch or venison or whatever
um take us down that detour why is
industrial farming potentially
problematic yeah
uh try to summarize a lot of stuff here
quickly
um so our
plants which ultimately are eaten by
animals to become our animal food
grow in soil or in Marine environments
in the ocean and they depend upon then
the Integrity of the nutrients that are
present for their growth so let's let's
go to terrestrial plants and talk about
things that grow in the soil the soil as
we know has its own microbiome and that
microbiome is as complex and interesting
as our own microbiome in our gut so if
you are doing industrial farming using a
lot of pesticides herbicides fertilizer
what you've done is to decondition the
soil and you have changed the microbiome
of the soil when you change that
microbiome of the soil it's like
changing the micro Bahama of our
intestinal tract it then becomes less
able to communicate to the genes of the
roots of the germinating seed of the
plant
that mechanism has now been well
discovered I can go into it in great
detail but I'll say that that there are
chemicals produced by the mycorrhizae
the soil fungi and bacteria in a healthy
soil that's communicate to the genes of
the germinating plant to produce its own
outcome right stuff is dizzyingly
complicated and so intertwined so let me
make it simple for to hopefully give a
an endpoint to your question so if we
overly use the soil without renourishing
it just like we might over utilize our
body by using too much antibiotics to
kill bugs that kills our microbiome it
will then have an impact Upstream of who
eats those plants right because those
plants will not have the same things in
them that a plant that the same gene
type that same seed which grown in a
rich microbiome-rich soil so we have
seen through the development of
industrialized agriculture a depletion
of ourselves not just mineral depletion
but the actual living texture of the
complexity of that soil just as we've
seen the living texture of our own human
microbiomes being compromised so we're
seeing diseases come as a consequence of
those immunological imbalances so if you
were to ask me is it important then to
eat animals that had food that came from
plants that were grown in soils with
complex microbiome I would say
absolutely yes so that kind of answers a
little bit of your question why is it
depend upon where that comes from
it doesn't answer just a little bit but
it is so famous quote as the island of
my knowledge grows so to the shore of my
ignorance the more I learn about it like
honestly 20 years ago I was so arrogant
about diet and how people should eat and
you know look I learned how to get lean
and it's so simple and you just do this
and then my wife had massive dietary
issues I mean it was it was a moment so
acute that she remembers where she was
standing and what happened and the great
irony was it was celebrating the success
that we had had at Quest we were in
living in this big fancy house and we're
standing in the pool with the waterfall
and we pop a bottle of champagne she
takes one Sip and it changed the rest of
her life now of course it was a
threshold event where it had been
building and building a building for
years and then maybe more and then just
click and it was Nightmare City and as
as that all happened all of my thinking
that I knew something just fell away so
I want to Anchor us back around one of
the coolest things that I've heard in
like the sphere of diet and that's this
idea that I can rejuvenate my immune
system okay super powerful I want to
marry that to the title of a book that
you wrote which is amazing disease
delusion and so getting people to
understand that the very Paradigm with
which we look at our bodies the way that
we function is off and so you've been
very careful to explain that learning
the things we've learned over the you
know hundreds of years we've been paying
attention to stuff discovering
antibiotics and all it's incredibly
powerful and the number of lives is
saved is insane but we've now you know
you talk about it works for a while and
then it becomes detrimental we're now
sort of coming down the other side the
efficiency we've learned in farming
amazing but now it's becoming monocrops
and about products amazing but now we're
taking too many of them and we've
developed this sense of there's a pill
for every ill so what are those sort of
big pieces in your life that you do that
are based on what you know about
rejuvenating the immune system the
realities of soil and animals and fat
storage and all that stuff
so if you bear with me for about a
minute or two I'm down this this is
really kind of Unearthed and I'm going
to get get real here for a second
um so I'm coming up to my 77th birthday
congratulations yeah I think it is
you're [__] sharp I think it is
um and
every day is a magic day for us right go
when we think forward
so how did I actually start down this
process of being this Explorer this kind
of um
Inquisitor
and it was from an experience in my life
that was irreversible of which it was a
one-way Street both for my wife and I
and that was as I just had come to my
first real job as a professor in Tacoma
Washington in 1970
start a birthday
that was the that year I was hired as a
combination chemistry and environmental
science professor
we moved into our little condo having
just relocated from Oregon where I
finished my graduate work
and uh four days into it we had our
four-month infant son and our
two-year-old son
I wake up at six o'clock in the morning
to find our infants Undead oh [__] whoa
I did not know that yeah
uh
he was in a topic baby uh there he had
you know a lot more uh sensitivities
than now we've had three other sons that
they didn't Express that in their
infancy I we still to this day don't
fully know all the explanation but I can
tell you it set me on a life Pursuit
because from that moment uh ever there
are certain marks in our life right that
um you can manage but you don't get rid
of and that's one of them so it set me
on a path to say if I can help prevent
one set of parents or one child from
ever going through this it was a life
well served and that opened me to any
any new idea
as a professor I was you know kind of
channeled in my thinking I was a fast
learner I was kind of moving quickly I
was a full tenured professor in six
years and you know so I was I was a high
achiever type of guy and so that to do
that you got to be very focused and very
channeled but suddenly I said to myself
I need to be alerting and open to every
idea I don't have to accept every idea
but I have to listen carefully because
there's wisdom out there that I might
not be able to understand if I'm just
channeled in my own myopia uh that took
me then six million miles over the last
years traveling all around the world to
meet some of the most remarkable people
and have conversations that
epigenetically marked me I'm a mosaic of
all those experiences I'm a universal
Seeker to answer exactly the question
that you just raised that has been my
Pursuit so the answer to that question
is I'm still in search I don't think I
have all the answers but I think we have
made significant progress over the last
now 40 plus years in in
producing an architecture it allows us
to start understanding how to assemble
this information to personalize it to
the individual need and that's been
always my since I worked with Linus
Pauling a two-time Nobel Prize in winner
at Stanford in my sabbatical years and
early 80s I have been a champion for
personalization because I think if you
don't personalize then you're not
treating the uniqueness of each of our
facets on the diamond of life with the
kind of what I would call
a celebration that it deserves if I
would have learned it maybe uh you know
now it's 47 you're known more than that
it was 50 years ago actually that our
son Kurt passed away if I would have
known what I know today well who knows I
think I might have been more effective
in in modulating his immune system and
and preventing some of the things that
we had to deal with so I think these are
all the parts of gaining some Mastery
some wisdom certainly it's a lifelong
process you're never fully realized but
it is as striving as you do so well to
really open up new opportunities for
discovery that can help other people in
the process so that's what led us into
Himalayan territory buckwheat that's
what led me into form big bold Health
that's what led us into now owning a a
regenerative sustainable oil plant in
Dutch Harbor Alaska in the Aleutian
Islands all of those things were part of
this this uh attempt to try to pull
together things that people really could
do to rejuvenate and provide more
resiliency of their immune system
I love the idea of personalization I
think that's really important that was
something that we learned with Lisa as
she was going through everything was
just like things they don't bother me
but they'll bother her and they'll
bother her really substantially and
things that make me put on fat don't
make her put on fat and so it's like
this really weird thing of
um you really do have to personalize it
I heard you say that this is going to be
the age where we go from the age of the
average to the age of the individual
right
I thought that's really important you
talked about the future of medicine
being the ability to look at the
intersection of genetics and the
lifestyle and then you you didn't say AI
but that was certainly what I took away
from it that we're gonna use AI
effectively to really look at what is
the interaction they're in and being
able to carry our own medical records
with us decipher all of that
now having said all of that we're going
to go into this time where we're going
to be able to do a lot more than we can
do now
but what are like the the basics that
you advise for people
is it eat the rainbow is it don't eat
sugar is it plants only no what's not
plants only I I think eating close to
the ground as much as possible and the
ground does that mean it means things
that we're alive
that didn't get through seven processes
of uh of processing to be shelf stable
for Millennia
um and and we're going now into an epic
period as you probably know there's this
uh uh this recent book about Silicon
Valley now taking over the food supply
system through this new food technology
doing fermentation technology to produce
uh mimics the to animal protein and
synthetic milk proteins that come from
clone genes from unicellular organisms
this is a real Trend you know we see it
with the impossible burgers and these
meat substitutes so the question is are
they the same and
the answer is they may taste the same
they may even look the same they cook
the same but they're not the same I mean
nature is complex and the more we study
foods that we're growing in soils or
foods that were eaten by animals that
were grown in soils the more we find out
that there are things we didn't ever
even know about that are part of this
orchestration so my feeling is eat the
rainbow but it's not the synthetic
rainbow it's it's foods that have their
natural colorants because each of those
colors is a different phytochemical that
has a different principle now let me say
something quickly about that because
this Loops back to your really I think
insightful question about phytochemicals
we used to think about phytochemicals as
being antioxidants and and so it's just
like measuring the phytochemical content
in your diet was to use an indication
that's on some food labels called orac
orac which stands for oxygen reducing
capacity oxygen reducing absorbent
capacity orac and so it was said well
the higher the orac value the the better
that food is because it has more
antioxidant potential
well I'm kind of a early stage
antioxidant researcher going back into
the 70s so I think I have some pedigree
in this area and I've been saying for
more than 20 years it's not about
antioxidants alone that makes these
plant Foods valuable so you just can't
substitute one orac for another orac and
get the same thing because each of those
chemicals that are in those individual
plants those phytochemicals has unique
signaling properties I'm going back to
your original Concepts that they send a
signal to the genes that's used unique
to them so a glucosinolite phytochemical
coming from cruciferous vegetables is
different than the polyphenols of
Atlantic acid coming from berries they
both are antioxidants but they have
entirely different physiological
mechanisms and therefore what are we
really trying to accomplish are we
trying to rejuvenate the immune system
through the hormetic effects of multiple
signals on goal so that we have an
offense not just a defense that's
producing a younger immune system I I
went on our own program our immuno
Rejuvenation program him and I consider
myself a pretty dedicated
healthy person exercise proper sleep
blah blah blah so I went on our program
and I started measuring my epigenetic
programming of my immune system when I
started off at the age of 75 I guess is
when I started this my immune system Age
based upon epigenetic profiling using AI
determination of the methylation
patterns of my immune cells was I was I
was 75 in birthdays but I was 67 in my
immunity so he said well that's that's
pretty good I'm I'm my immune system is
younger than my age and birthdays but
then I really dedicated myself to our
program and I really said could I really
have an effect that would be beyond that
of what I've seen and lo and behold
another three months in retesting I was
53. whoa yeah I I dropped it another
seven years what'd you do I went on to
our immuno Rejuvenation program exactly
what you and I are talking about I
religiously dedicated myself to stay on
the program extra exercise sleep Stress
Management polyphenols
omega-3 fatty acids prebiotics
probiotics the whole nature of what
we're trying to do in big bold Health
was whole food or supplementation it
makes whole food with some
supplementation because I can't in the
way I live my life always every meal
prepare it from the way that I would
want it to be prepared so you know we
try to provide some convenience in the
way that can be done but it starts
obviously with food can I predict what
your diet was sure okay so and I do want
to know if I get it wrong but I want to
see if I've understood everything you've
been saying so uh there's going to be a
lot of fatty fish grass fed
[Music]
um
sustainable farming if possible so that
the soil is accounted for in the whole
equation yep
you're going to eat the rainbow but
you're going to consider seasonality as
well
so it's uh is it fresh you mentioned
that in the beginning so something that
you wouldn't have to get Frozen although
I happen to know the punchline about
some of the way you guys prepare fish
and you do freeze it to preserve the oil
so that's probably not a hard and fast
rule but the freshness is what you're
going for there and I do say that
because we do a lot of boating up north
that we don't have access always to
fresh fruit and vegetables we do do
Frozen in our summer trips so yes but
would you still try to time the frozen
fruit to what would have been seasonal
exactly makes sense do you at all
account for being northern European in
descent yes I think the genomic template
upon which we lay our lifestyles is very
important to know when people ask me
should I get my jeans tested I say yes
this is your book of life will you tell
the story about your dad I thought that
was really eye-opening oh wow that's
amazing that you're familiar with that
story thank you so uh I I've had I had
the great privilege of going through
every phase with my father and including
him coming out of retirement when we
started our first company because he
said you know nothing about business
which was true and so he and I worked
together for a number of years with he
kind of being the financial manager and
blah blah blah
eventually then he did retire and we
and my mother went out for his
retirement tour around the United States
and and I noticed when he came back
after a couple of years of of being in
this retirement period that he didn't
seem quite as sharp and uh and so I
started talking with him and he always
provided he's a life of the mind he was
he was a scholar it was a prodigious
reader and I and he said you know I I
think I'm starting to lose a little on
My Edge so we um we followed very
closely then he and my mother decided
they would move down to uh to Northern
California from Washington State so now
I wasn't seeing him as frequently as
when they we lived in the same area
and I would periodically stop in there
and uh and then he started to really
slip off the edge and he started getting
Parkinson's and early stage dementia and
it was it was really His function was
deteriorating uh rapidly and and my
mother was a big devotee of health and
actually the one who probably got me
nutrition to begin with my sister and I
both
um she said you know Jeff uh I don't
know exactly what to do I'm really
trying to do the best I can but but I
really see your dad
slipping away and at this point he had
been moved into another bedroom because
he wasn't sleeping well through the
night and so you know then my mother
would come in and get him dressed in the
morning and so his his fear of influence
is very compressed so
um
she then said uh you got to come down
and visit and see what's going on so
when I did yeah it was it was pretty
dramatic how how quickly he had slipped
so I I said well is he seeing a Doctrine
and in the local area oh yes it's an MD
PhD in the local area he's a
hematologist
um and internist and I said oh okay well
that's that's good
um
so does he uh what kind of analysis is
he doing I mean oh kind of a good
analysis routine analysis I said well
could I see the medical records I'm sure
he could get them from him so I I
communicated with him and his analysis
was usual in customer it was good but it
was nothing that we would do if we were
doing a more detailed functional
analysis so I recognized that there was
one thing that he had not done that I
thought being a hematologist I could
easily get him to do and that is I asked
him do you know what my father's vitamin
B12 level is
and he said well no he doesn't have any
signs of pernicious anemia and I said no
no I'm not asking my pernicious anemia
I'm not his functional status of vitamin
B12 and he said well no I I don't think
so but let me take a look so he did a
serum vitamin B12 level and he came back
and he was feeling proud of himself he
said see it's in the normal range and I
said well but that's actually not what I
really wanted to know and I think you as
a unitologists might want to go to the
next level the function of the B12 not
just it's in its blood but how it's
functioning he says well what do you
recommend I said you know this this test
of measuring in his urine homocysteine
and methylmalonic acid or in his in his
serum those two chemicals because those
are byproducts from the body's ability
to use vitamin B12 and folic acid not
just how much is in the body but how is
it functioning and so he said well I'm
not aware of it that test is is used
traditionally and I'm thinking well gee
what do you see the PHD in MD and but
okay he says so do you have any papers
on that
you never have asked Jeff plan for
papers
so I uh this back in the days of facts
is so I faxed him so many papers that it
burned out his fax machine literally
because nurse called the next day and
said there were papers all over the
office floor and so uh if he didn't call
me he said oh there's a lot of
literature on this isn't there I said
yes there is and and he says okay well
maybe I had to measure those and I said
yeah and he said but I'm not sure
Medicare covers them I said look I don't
care if Medicare covers it you know
we'll pay for it cash just get the and
here's the lab you can have it done so
we got it all done and alone behold the
data came back and it was very high in
those metabolites showing how to
functional vitamin B12 and folate
deficiency
so then he said well now what do I do
about that now remember I want to say he
was a hematologist
um and I I said well I think he would
treat this like you would consider
treating pernicious anemia he's like
pre-pregnitious anemia to give it some
terminology and so I would give I am
intramuscular injections a B12 daily and
I would give a high oral dose of
5-methyltetrader folate the absorbable
form of folic acid so that happened
I waited then up in Washington state
with baited breath as them down in
California what was going to happen and
no news for several days and then one
morning
this this was an epipheral experience in
my life actually one morning my mother
called and she's hysterical
and I think things have really gone
South I am I the worst in suddenly
presents itself I think oh my word and I
get her calmed down because I was she
wasn't being coherent and and she and I
said so is Dad really in trouble it's
just oh no no no no that's not why I'm
telling you
what I'm trying to tell you is for the
first time in three years
he came into my bedroom fully dressed
saying let's go on a picnic wow she came
in the chills and for the next six years
my father went back to his computer
which was his favorite thing he liked
programming and doing Simple Things on
his computer
and he was functional wow and
if there was ever any need for me to see
the validity of this construct that
we've been trying to teach other doctors
about over the last 40 years that was
like uh it made it all real what how did
you know that it was going to be related
to B12
well because there's a big literature
about functional B12 deficiency and
encephalopathy and and it's a
combination of folic acid and you know
and seen then by these Pathways in in
neurochemistry that are so dependent
upon those nutrients for their metabolic
function producing energy mitochondrial
activity and so forth so I thought I
thought he had a mitochondropathy that
could have been B12 and folate dependent
and then he probably was a malabsorber
of B12 which you know with the lowered
hydrochloric acid secretion with age and
his atrophic gastritis type B that often
happens in older age and so you don't
absorb as well your B12 you don't have
as much intrinsic factor being produced
by urine stomach so this is these are
things that average docs are not trained
in they might have learned it
esoterically but they don't have
clinical experience so they don't think
about it often when it comes to clinical
management
okay so as you come at things from a
functional perspective what's going
wrong what is it that they either have
too much of or don't have enough of
that's the underlying cause of this if
somebody's struggling with something
like dementia I mean let's pull a hard
one
obviously as of right now it feels like
uh people knowledgeable in the space
would say it's probably preventable but
if somebody's already struggling with it
is there are we just in protocol mode of
trying to slow the decline or is there
something that we can do that is the
science of Hope to use your earlier
phrase yes the science of Hope
absolutely if there's anything I want to
imprint in this discussion with you to
leave as a takeaway
is
we have to be very mindful the science
of Hope is on our threshold
and you know I have a good friend and
colleague I'm sure you are aware of no
human that's Dr Dale pregnancy who is a
neurologist neuroscientist
um at UCLA and and uh has been looking
at the reversibility of early stage
Alzheimer's through a multifocal
approach using personalized lifestyle
medicine intervention all the things
that we've been talking about
and so he started implementing these
constructs that we've been talking about
in functional medicine that really are
part of this whole big bold Health
construct that we can take charge and we
can employ the science of Hope in a real
way to turn back things because they're
rejuvenatable they can be rejuvenated
and he just published another on a
series of papers a pilot trial I think
of 30 patients who had different degrees
of early stage Alzheimer's with
cognitive deficits and if a gamble
shrinkage and so forth showing outcomes
after a period of less than a year of
improved function with all the standard
measuring devices that are used to
assess Alzheimer's disease plus
increased volume of their hippocampus in
their brain increased volume so these
constructs that we are hopeless in our
thoughts about Alzheimer is that
billions of dollars have been spent on
drugs to try to treat it unsuccessfully
that we have no successful treatments
today the successful treatments are in
the wisdom of nature it's in the wisdom
that we need to go back and relearn that
a lot of people have lost because
they're looking for the synthetic single
Silver Bullet that's going to treat a
multifactorial condition Alzheimer's is
not a disease it's a complex outcome
from the marriage of our genes with our
environment with our lifestyle and the
ladders the latter of those
environmental lifestyle are modifiable
that's where we should be spending time
and energy we're not spending time and
energy and government support for
research in that area we have to do it
on our own we have to pull ourselves up
by the bootstraps we have to create our
own science of Hope to demonstrate that
the solutions exist they just need to be
proven
yeah it's interesting so what is it
exactly that the modern lifestyle is
breaking is it that is it I know it's
both but are we suffering more from in
taking something that we shouldn't which
is my hypothesis or is it that we are
not eating something that we need to
like if you could only pull one of those
levers and I totally understand it's
obviously both but just to get a sense
of like which is attributing to more of
what we're going through
so I'm going to use the name Dr Sydney
Baker and he has what he calls the tack
rules
t-a-c-ks Attack rules he says
um there are two things that we know
if you sit on
two tanks
and you pull one out you won't get 50
reduction of pain
the second part of the tax rules is
that the future of health care is all
built on what you've just said
on getting rid of that which you don't
need and adding back that what you do
and that is the wisdom that really
incorporates itself in personalization
because what you take away and you add
back is different slightly from person
to person there are these guidance
principles we're talking about but it
really is in the face of personalization
that the outcome can be more successful
and I often say nutrition is for real
people statistical humans are a little
interest let me say it again that that's
a quote from Dr Roger Williams the
father of biochemical individuality I
quoted I wrote it down and have
memorized it and said it millions of
times since 1974 when I first didn't say
it
nutritionists or let's call it
functional medicine is for real people
statistical humans are of little
interest
but medicine that we use today is are
built around statistical humans you get
a diagnosis and now that is who you are
if it's diabetes you suddenly are the
diabetic patient but there are as many
forms of diabetes as there are as many
forms of disease yeah see that's
interesting so I heard you say that
and you pushed it farther and said as
you begin to like peel away all these
different things you realize that this
is just a cluster of symptoms that
people have sort of given a name to
could be coming from different things
and different people and so do you
really have this monolithic thing is
there a monolithic thing that seems so
true that there's a monolithic thing why
do you think that's the wrong model well
I don't want to throw away entirely this
this monolithic concept like monogenetic
diseases like phenylketonuria taste
sacks Wilson's uh sickle cell anemia we
know that there are many many
genetically linked diseases what are
called monogenetically linked to a
single Gene but what people don't have
often understand is that those let's use
Down syndrome as an example uh Trisomy
21. as we know from experience if if you
look at a whole variety of children that
have Down syndrome the severity of that
condition with the same genetic
diagnosis can be very very different
some people are high functioning uh
trisomy 21 downs and and they virtually
have a normal life and others are really
significantly adverse affected and maybe
they never even get to adulthood as a
consequence of the same genetic
characteristics so it's not that genes
are unimportant it's not that there are
not some kind of Monolithic indicators
but even those that are most profound
are modifiable into the phenotype into
how that person looks and feels based
upon the experience in which those genes
were expressing themselves let me give
another example phenylketonuria that's a
really interesting one because it's the
most common birth defect that is
genetically linked that there is it
phenylketon area PKU okay well what is
it actually it's a consequence of a
genetic abnormality of a single enzyme a
gene that controls a single enzyme
called phenylalene hydroxylase it
converts the amino acid phenylalanine
into the amino acid tyrosine and so if
you have a defect in that Gene that your
body can't convert that amino acid in
your food phenylalanine effectively in
the tyrosine so now you have an amino
acid disturbance you build up high
levels of phenylalanine you have too
little tyrosine which produces
neurotoxicity and what does that
manifest as like phenotypically are you
retardation retardation these these
children if they're untreated generally
don't get to adulthood
but we learned when I say we that's not
me right before me that was learned that
if you could for a recently secured
period of time in that child's life who
had this genetic characteristic if you
could [__] the intake in their diet of
that amino acid of phenylalanine
by using a prescribed diet was
containing proteins that were devoid or
Limited in phenylalanine you could
prevent that retardation whoa and they
could grow out of to extend their PKU
wow now what I'm saying and I want to
emphasize it because people do not
understand this that genetics definitely
are an important primer but they are not
actually the determinant that ultimately
determines how we function it's all the
other things that modulate the
orchestration of our genes we've talked
about epigenetics and all these things
that have gone back to the beginning of
our conversation so even in the most
dramatic cases of gin monogenetic
diseases we see variance in their
expression based upon other variables
that are generally tied to the lifestyle
environment and and things that that
individual has been exposed to even in
utero so that takes us even back to
pre-pregnancy planning and how the
mother and father were the biological
mother and father were were held healthy
with their egg and sperm and how that
combined together we now recognize these
epigenetic marks start even
preconceptually so it puts a lot of
opportunity but also responsibility on
us to make into conformed Intelligent
Decisions yeah speaking of so I remember
the first time that I heard somebody pop
off that autism was tied to diet I was
like get out of here
that seemed ridiculous is it ridiculous
or is there actually a possible
connection
well I think again we have to go
Upstream of that discussion because in
functional medicine we always try to say
okay what's the origin of that question
where did it come from and I think it
came from what is it that modulates then
neuronal function in uh in developing
children is it a combination of
exposures to maybe
xenobiotics we'll come back to these
foreign molecules that we now we have a
lot of toxins floating around in the
universe could that play a role could it
play a role that the microbiome was
Disturbed and produced then untoward
effects that we now are starting to see
some suggestion that the microbiome
plays a role in autism the the gut
immune system so I would not want to say
autism is caused by this yeah but I want
to say there are many variables that
play roles autism didn't this suddenly
come about because our genes changed you
know I think it's very important if you
look at the hockey stick of increasing
frequency of autism in the westernized
population it was coincident with
changes that were occurring in how we
lived how we ate how we moved how we how
environment which we lived and uh you
know some people say well it's because
of vaccination you know that's probably
a small player in the bigger picture of
things that impact the developing
nervous system and so I think all these
things go together as it relates to why
it is it's not just better diagnosis we
are actually seeing frequency increase
because the genes are being exposed to a
different set of collection in the
environment
yeah man this is like the the number of
things that we have changed in a modern
lifestyle compared to how we evolved is
is crazy now I'm a city bather so for me
I know some people really enjoy Forest
bathing and being out in nature and it's
not that I don't like that but the thing
that really lights my candle is going
into like Tokyo it's my favorite place
in planet Earth it's so incredible it's
just this overwhelming cityscape that
makes me feel alive and super creative
wonderful
but
it's so abnormal in terms of the way
that we came up
that I do wonder how much of our modern
lifestyle is causing problems so I'll
roll through the things that I think
whenever somebody asks me like hey I
want to be set up for success I want to
be my best my sharpest my whatever I'm
like
you you think I'm going to tell you what
book to read but I'm actually going to
start way back over here and so my first
thing is sleep sleep for me is like the
master regulator if you're not getting
sleep does your diet can be amazing if
you're not sleeping you're going to be
toast so you've got to get sleep and I
naturally tend to sleep about six hours
but I would like to sleep more if I'm
completely honest I don't use an alarm I
go to bed at nine I try to like be in
line with circadian rhythms get sunlight
my eyes the whole line but whether it's
stress which is my one Vice or natural I
don't know but I get about six but I
tell people sleep as much as your body
will let you
uh so sleep would be the first one
exercise is going to be huge I don't
think a lot about cardio but I do think
a lot about being strong putting
yourself under weight making sure that
you get your heart rate up working out
at a cardio Pace lifting weights maybe
even a better way okay so you sleep
exercise then meditation not necessarily
in that order because food is probably
more important but meditation so that
you're able to calm your nervous system
I find most people are not able to do
that and then diet because a lot of your
mental problems could be tied to your
diet the diet is basically what we've
been talking about here
that's sort of like the big cluster now
we can get into mind study stuff but
I'll set that aside for now that's sort
of the big bundle of things that I worry
about with people am I missing any big
zones
let me say
that you have just stepped off I believe
exactly where we should be in this point
of our conversation exactly
because everything you've just described
everything
is related to your immune system
function interesting so remember your
brain has an immune system the microglia
tell me and when a brain immune system
is alarmed you can't sleep so you say
get six hours sleep minimum and I would
say is it restful sleep and how do you
get the Restless sleep because if you
have an inflamed brain because your
immune system is is overactive
you're not sleeping well even if you're
in bed for six hours you know I learned
a lot from from these Biometrics that
we're starting to measure our 24 7 365
function and it's it's a revolutionary
thing for me I've been a biohacker for
30 years and
to look at my fitness score or my
Readiness score as given to you by Aura
ring yeah by the ordering which you know
I've had like 30 different wearables
over the years but but this one is very
convenient I like the way that it
assembles the information
um and by the way I have no Financial
relationship with Laura at all uh but
the what I've learned from my own
personal experience and it's been
replicated now I've given oral rings to
my family and so we've kind of all have
a chance to have discussions
um is when my Readiness score which
generally is is in the mid to high 80s
or low 90s
goes below that
it's something that I did or didn't do
that related to my immune system
function I see it in my respiration rate
my body temperature my pulse rate I see
it in my heart rate variability I see it
in my sleep cycling it it and and
therefore the aggregate is my Readiness
score when I look up in the morning it's
like oh geez now it's like in the low
70s what happened but then I can
directly see what's gone on either I
over trained or I didn't get activity or
I ate something I knew better than
eating or I had too much alcohol because
we were celebrating something and I
decided to have one more than I should
have or I was eating a food that I would
normally not have eaten because I knew
it was going to set up some kind of a
response and yes it told me the next day
because my immune system is the ultimate
Arbiter there are only three places in
our body that are sampling your outside
world 24 7 365. your nervous system your
mucosal surfaces and your immune system
and your immune system is intervated in
inter communicating with your nervous
system and your mucosal surfaces all the
time is a super system
therefore what most rapidly changes upon
you stepping out of your program is your
immune system function it immediately
tells you so what I try to get people to
understand is these are surrogate
markers for immune function when you do
the right things your immune system has
been rejuvenated you're an autophagy you
are epigenetically marking the brilliant
genes of benefits and you're not turning
on your alarm genes that's and it takes
maybe two to three months to get there
because your immune system has to
re-pattern itself over the course of
several months to really regenerate its
function that's why big bold health is
focused on the immune system it's the
Gateway into all of these things it's an
interrogation that gives you immediate
feedback what's your thinking on fasting
I have a follow-up question but we'll
start there well I think fasting in and
of itself that would be like juice
fasting or water fasting water only is
what I mean yeah I think you have to be
very cautious to know what you're doing
uh you know I've been in
in the Nordic countries I've done
fasting before in places where it's been
historically fasting clinics
um and and some people just do
unbelievably well I've been in clinics
where people have full meaning arthritis
and by the time they're through with a
three-week regimented controlled fast
they're symptoms of arthritis are
completely gone wow so there is there is
a place for it but it's you've got to be
very cautious because metabolism can be
brittle in some people and you're you're
you're stressing resilience
and and some people are not resilient
enough to be able to manage that so what
happens to their metabolism if they fast
and their metabolism is brittle well you
can get into cardiovascular problems
because of electrolyte disturbances you
can get into neurological problems
related to kind of psychotic episodes in
the extreme case and we've seen that
before I mean you're there are people
with the uni kind of diversity of
different types that are not well
adapted at all to the because it is
stressful to the body you're changing
metabolism remarkably rapidly and if you
don't have the capacity and that head
space to accommodate that it can produce
uh problems that's why I'm much more in
time frequency and time restricted
eating so keep the window brief 14 hours
minimum okay and then what's sort of
your maximum where you don't need to
sweat it
well I get a heck that depends a lot on
the person and their their particular
disposition but I would say that if you
have in me anywhere between a six to
eight hour window of eating in a day and
so that means the rest of the day you're
not eating right then that you're going
to be in that in that zone where most
people can tolerate it safely and it can
be integrating their life and they can
comply because if it's no good if you
can't stay with it yeah
yeah intermittent fasting for me has
been a game changer and once I got it
took me a while to get metabolically
flexible and the first time that I went
full-blown ketogenic I did a four to one
fat to combine carbohydrate protein that
was miserable because I didn't know how
to manage my electrolytes
not fun but once I was on the other side
so I'd struggled with joint pain for 15
years and I was icing my wrists every
night I had what looked like permanent
burn marks on the back of my wrist
because I was just icing them so much
and didn't think there was anything I
could do about it to be honest I just
thought well genetics hey it's just my
lot in life not realizing it was of
course exactly what I was eating and
when I switched it up the joint pain
went away and I was like oh my God it
was so crazy it was the closest thing to
taking a drug I'd ever experienced in my
life and through that you did take a
drug you took the science of Hope drug
yeah you re-pattered your immune system
and you know a lot of people marginalize
what we talk about saying well that's
cute or that's interesting but that's
not as powerful as doing real medicine
I'm saying this is real medicine oh yeah
there is no question about it when you
turn on the right jeans and turn off the
the the genes that are giving you
problems that's real medicine
and that's what we do that is what that
that's the big bold health concept we're
not like any more self-conscious about
this I'm not shrinking around saying oh
I hope I don't get called out and
someone criticizes me no this stuff
works yeah
no I mean it it food changed my life
drugs have not changed my life because I
try never to take drugs but food like
that really that and that was my first
experience where I was like this is so
profound so I previous to that I'd used
it to lose weight but that always felt
like really really hard once I got
metabolically flexible and I could go
let's say 20 there were times where I'd
go 24 hours without food not like oh I
didn't even notice but like I could go
20 hours without really even thinking
about it the last four is like to hit a
goal sure and so now I've been
intermittent fasting and I do my average
out so I tracked every day for I must
attract every day for more than a year
and it averaged out to about 17 and a
half hours of fasting every day and then
my diet is also very clean meaning that
it's primarily Whole Foods like almost
exclusively Whole Food
um I don't eat enough variety that is
for sure that would be if I were gonna
say I have two vices
I am I SP I'm very comfortable in stress
so I know that I'm shortening my life uh
and then I eat very simplistically so
I'll eat the same things over and over
and over and over and over and over and
over well no not just to say I want to
challenge that yeah you know stress is
not necessarily A pathology
distressing distress maybe a pathology
stress is energizing stress is a virtue
stress is important
speaking my language here yeah
absolutely uh you know if you look at
individuals that are put in in self-con
confinement in which they've been
sensory deprived and they have virtually
no stress yeah they break mentally yes
they get sick very rapidly so this
concept of stress is is something we
ought to avoid that's that's ridiculous
we ought to be seeking out positive
stress we ought to be seeking out it's
it's a powerful energizing
it's when it tips over on the other side
and it becomes distress on the curve
because we're not properly supporting it
and in fact again we come back to will
distress have anything to do with your
immune system or does your immune system
have anything to do with stress of
course they're intimately connected
because the glucocorticoids are produced
by your adrenal glands cortisol
for one is an immune active compound so
when your immune system is Disturbed you
have an immune connection to your your
blood pressure and to your stress
modulating systems the so-called hpat
axis hypothalamus pituitary adrenal
thyroid axis so all these are part of
this web this is why we think
functionally about where the Gateway of
Entry the Gateway of Entry is your
function of your immune system because
if you get that right you're using
stress as a power Energizer not as a
distress
yeah I would say 90 of the time that's
true there are definitely times where
it's like oops like we have now
officially spilled into distress but
yeah that's a great point because I
really do I am a bit of a an apologist
for how much I work in my stress but to
be honest I do it because I love it and
it makes me feel alive and it's exciting
and I love pushing myself
all right speaking of pushing oneself
where can people follow you
well I think bigwoolhealth.com or
jeffreybland.com Jeff Rey Bland
bland.com either one of those can we got
hundreds of videos right you know
different kinds of plans programs
immunore Rejuvenation whatever they they
want they can find on those sites I love
it guys functional medicine will change
your life if you let it and speaking of
things that will change your life if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care peace
average American is eating for 16 hours
a day and 60 percent of the food we eat
is processed